---
title: "Wolbachia and invasion"
excerpt: "Can Wolbachia horizontal transfers lead to increased invasive potential?"
collection: research
---
### Work financed by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) projects (P30456-B29 and P30957-B29) awarded to [Hannes Schuler](https://sites.google.com/view/hschuler/)

<!---*Wolbachia* is a ubiquitous and diverse group of endosymbionts found in the reproductive tissues of arthropods and nematodes. This alphaproteobacterium has evolved various means for facilitating its vertical transmission despite detrimental repercussions on its host. These include reproductive manipulations, such as sperm-egg incompatibility, parthenogenesis, feminization, and male-killing. Incongruent results between *Wolbachia* and host phylogenies have implied that the bacteria can also switch horizontally among species. However, examples of horizontal transmission of *Wolbachia* between taxa and the subsequent spread of the bacterium in novel hosts in nature are rare.
-->
Globalization and climate disruption have allowed further long-range colonization events by invasive species than ever before. These facilitate interactions between invasive species with co-occurring native species.
The Eastern cherry fruit fly, *Rhagoletis cingulata*, is a significant economic pest species in North America and has recently been introduced in Europe. Here, it co-infests cherries with the native European cherry fruit fly, *R. cerasi*. This shared habitat has resulted in two independent horizontal transfers of a native *Wolbachia* strain, wCer1, from *R. cerasi* to the invasive *R. cingulata* in Germany and Hungary. Since *Wolbachia* is usually inherited vertically through the maternal germline, our system provides a unique opportunity to resolve the spatial dynamics of directional horizontal *Wolbachia* transfers in natural populations. Our system also allows us to investigate the role of *Wolbachia* infection in invasiveness by comparing measured temporal infection dynamics to expected values under classical *Wolbachia* infection models.
Using a combination of short-read (Illumina) and long-read (PacBio and Nanopore) sequencing, we first assembled a dozen *Wolbachia* genomes from individuals of the invasive (wCin2 strains) and the native fly species (wCer1 strains). We compared these strains and found that major structural inversions and duplications have resulted in differences in cytoplasmic incompatibility factor genes between the two strains. These genes are essential as they determine the *Wolbachia* spread dynamics through the invasive *R. cingulata* populations. In addition to these two main *Wolbachia* strains, we also found and characterized three minor strains (wCer2, wCer4, and wCer5) in the native *R. cerasi* species. We hypothesize that these strains are involved in substantial local dynamic differences. After comparing the invasive *R. cingulata* regional German and Hungarian strains to North American strains, we found significantly more SNPs in Germany. These results strongly suggest that the German invasion route is older than the Hungarian route. This work paints a picture of a highly dynamic system where *Wolbachia* plays a significant role in the invasive potential of *R. cingulata* in Europe. It also highlights the role of horizontal *Wolbachia* transfers between species as a mechanism for biological novelty.
